Welcome to Anaesthesia Compendium. Today's viva station: vaporisers.
I shall take the candidate through it, question by question. Let us begin.
Let us begin. What is the purpose of a vaporiser,
and what physical problem must it solve?
A vaporiser is the device on the anaesthetic machine that converts a liquid
volatile anaesthetic agent into its vapour and adds it to the fresh gas flow in an
accurately controlled concentration, so that the anaesthetist can deliver a known,
adjustable concentration of agent to the patient.
Its purpose is therefore the controlled,
accurate and stable delivery of volatile anaesthetic vapour.
The physical problem it must solve arises from the nature of volatile agents and
their saturated vapour pressure.
A volatile agent in a closed container produces a vapour whose pressure,
the saturated vapour pressure, depends on the agent and rises steeply with
temperature; for the common agents this saturated vapour pressure is high relative
to the concentrations we wish to deliver,
so that gas fully saturated with agent contains far more than a clinically useful
concentration — for example, saturated sevoflurane vapour represents a
concentration far above the few per cent required.
The vaporiser must therefore take a controlled fraction of saturated vapour and
dilute it precisely into the fresh gas to give the low concentration desired,
and it must do this stably despite the cooling that evaporation causes,
despite changes in flow and temperature, and accurately for the specific agent.
The challenge is thus to produce a controlled,
dilute and stable output from a liquid whose vapour is far too concentrated and
whose evaporation tends to cool and so destabilise it.
So the vaporiser's purpose is to add volatile agent to the fresh gas in an
accurately controlled concentration,
and the physical problem it solves is to dilute the agent's high saturated vapour
pressure precisely to the low clinical concentration required,
stably despite the cooling of evaporation and changes in flow and temperature.
Explain saturated vapour pressure and how it relates to vaporiser output.
Saturated vapour pressure is the key physical property underlying vaporiser
function, and understanding it explains both how the vaporiser produces a known
concentration and why temperature compensation is necessary.
The saturated vapour pressure of a volatile agent is the partial pressure exerted
by its vapour when the vapour is in equilibrium with the liquid agent in a closed
space — that is, when the gas above the liquid is fully saturated and can hold no
more vapour at that temperature.
Its essential features are that it depends only on the agent and the temperature,
rising steeply as temperature rises, and being independent of the ambient pressure.
The concentration of agent in fully saturated vapour is the saturated vapour
pressure expressed as a fraction of the total pressure:
for an agent with a saturated vapour pressure of, say,
twenty-two kilopascals at room temperature,
fully saturated vapour at atmospheric pressure contains about twenty-two per cent
agent — far above the clinical requirement of a few per cent.
The vaporiser works by fully saturating a small portion of the gas flow with agent
and then diluting this with the remaining gas to achieve the desired output
concentration.
Because the saturated vapour pressure rises with temperature,
the concentration of agent in the saturated portion rises as the vaporiser warms
and falls as it cools — and the evaporation of agent cools the liquid — so without
compensation the output would fall as the vaporiser cooled.
So saturated vapour pressure is the temperature-dependent equilibrium vapour
pressure of the agent, determining the high concentration of the saturated vapour
that the vaporiser must dilute, and because it varies with temperature,
and evaporation cools the agent, the vaporiser requires temperature compensation to
keep its output stable.
Describe the principle of the variable-bypass plenum vaporiser.
The variable-bypass plenum vaporiser is the standard design of agent-specific
vaporiser used on the anaesthetic machine, and its principle of operation,
splitting the gas flow and recombining it,
is central to understanding controlled vapour delivery.
The term plenum denotes that the gas is driven through the vaporiser under a slight
positive pressure from the machine, as opposed to being drawn through.
The incoming fresh gas flow is divided into two streams.
One stream, the smaller, is directed into the vaporising chamber,
where it passes over or through the liquid agent — often via wicks that increase
the surface area — and becomes fully saturated with vapour at the chamber
temperature.
The other, larger stream bypasses the vaporising chamber entirely.
The two streams recombine at the outlet,
the saturated vapour from the chamber being diluted by the bypass gas to give the
final output concentration.
The proportion of gas directed into the chamber versus the bypass — the splitting
ratio — is set by the concentration control dial,
which the anaesthetist turns to select the output concentration;
a higher setting directs more gas through the chamber, giving a higher output.
The vaporiser is calibrated so that the dial setting corresponds to the actual
delivered concentration, accounting for the saturated vapour pressure of the
specific agent, which is why each vaporiser is agent-specific.
Temperature and flow compensation maintain accuracy.
So the variable-bypass plenum vaporiser splits the fresh gas into a stream that is
fully saturated in the vaporising chamber and a bypass stream,
recombining them so that the saturated vapour is diluted to the output
concentration, the splitting ratio set by the concentration dial and calibrated for
the specific agent.
How is temperature compensation achieved, and why is it necessary?
Temperature compensation is essential to the accurate function of the plenum
vaporiser, because the output would otherwise vary with temperature,
and it is achieved by a combination of the vaporiser's construction and an
automatic compensating mechanism.
The necessity arises from two linked effects.
First, the saturated vapour pressure of the agent,
and so the concentration in the saturated portion of gas,
rises with temperature and falls as the vaporiser cools; second,
the evaporation of agent draws latent heat from the liquid,
cooling it progressively as the vaporiser is used.
Without compensation, the vaporiser would therefore cool during use and its output
would fall, becoming inaccurate. Two design features address this.
The vaporiser is constructed of metal of high thermal capacity and high thermal
conductivity, so that it acts as a heat reservoir and readily conducts heat from
the surroundings to the cooling liquid,
minimising and slowing the temperature fall and keeping the temperature relatively
stable.
Second, an automatic temperature-compensating mechanism adjusts the splitting ratio
as the temperature changes: typically a temperature-sensitive element,
such as a bimetallic strip or an expansion device,
alters the size of the bypass or chamber channel so that,
as the vaporiser cools and the saturated concentration falls,
more gas is directed through the chamber to compensate,
keeping the output constant, and conversely on warming.
This maintains a stable output over the range of clinical temperatures.
So temperature compensation is necessary because the saturated vapour pressure
falls and the agent cools by latent heat during use,
and it is achieved by high-thermal-capacity,
high-conductivity construction acting as a heat reservoir and by an automatic
temperature-sensitive mechanism, such as a bimetallic strip,
that adjusts the splitting ratio to hold the output constant.
What other factors affect vaporiser output, and how are they managed?
Besides temperature, several other factors can affect the output of a vaporiser,
and a complete account must consider how the design manages them and where the
anaesthetist must remain aware of their effects.
The first is the fresh gas flow rate.
A well-designed vaporiser is calibrated to give an accurate output over a wide
range of flows, the design ensuring full saturation of the chamber gas across this
range, but at very low and very high flows accuracy may fall — at very high flows
the chamber gas may not fully saturate, reducing output,
and at very low flows other effects intervene.
The second is the carrier gas composition:
the output is slightly affected by the gas used,
since the addition of nitrous oxide, which is more soluble in the agent,
can transiently alter output, and the viscosity and density of the carrier affect
the splitting; these effects are usually small.
The third is intermittent back pressure from the patient or ventilator,
transmitted back into the vaporiser, which can cause the pumping effect,
where the fluctuating pressure intermittently compresses and expands the chamber
gas, episodically increasing the output above the set value;
this is minimised by design features such as a long inlet tube, baffles,
or check valves to reduce the transmission of back pressure.
A related pressurising effect can also alter output.
Tilting or tipping the vaporiser can allow liquid agent into the bypass,
causing a dangerously high output, so vaporisers must be kept upright and,
if tipped, flushed before use.
So vaporiser output is affected by flow rate, carrier gas,
intermittent back pressure causing the pumping effect, and tilting,
managed by calibration across a flow range,
by design features minimising back-pressure effects,
and by keeping the vaporiser upright — with the anaesthetist aware of these
influences.
Why does desflurane require a special vaporiser, and how does it work?
Desflurane requires a fundamentally different vaporiser from the other volatile
agents because of its unusual physical properties,
and the design of its vaporiser is an instructive contrast to the conventional
plenum vaporiser.
The peculiarity of desflurane is twofold:
it has a very high saturated vapour pressure,
close to atmospheric pressure at room temperature,
and a boiling point of only about twenty-three degrees Celsius,
just above normal room temperature.
These properties make it unsuitable for a conventional variable-bypass vaporiser:
its saturated vapour pressure is so high that small changes in temperature would
cause enormous, unpredictable changes in output,
and because it boils near room temperature,
the cooling of evaporation or a warm theatre could cause it to boil erratically,
making conventional temperature compensation impossible.
The solution is a heated, pressurised vaporiser,
exemplified by the desflurane vaporiser.
In this design, the desflurane is contained in a sump that is electrically heated
to a constant temperature well above its boiling point, around thirty-nine degrees,
so that it is maintained as a pressurised vapour at a constant,
high and reproducible pressure, independent of ambient temperature.
This pure desflurane vapour is then injected, or metered,
into the fresh gas flow through a control valve,
the amount being electronically adjusted in proportion to the fresh gas flow to
give the set concentration.
Thus rather than passing gas over the liquid,
the device produces vapour at a controlled pressure and meters it into the gas
stream. The vaporiser requires electrical power and warms up before use.
So desflurane requires a special vaporiser because its high saturated vapour
pressure and near-room-temperature boiling point preclude conventional design,
and its heated, pressurised vaporiser holds the agent as vapour at a constant high
temperature and pressure and meters it electronically into the fresh gas flow in
proportion to that flow.
Describe the filling of vaporisers and the safety features involved.
The filling of vaporisers with liquid agent is a procedure with important safety
implications, and a system of safety features is built into the filling
arrangements to prevent errors, principally the filling of a vaporiser with the
wrong agent.
The central hazard is that a vaporiser filled with an agent other than the one for
which it is calibrated would deliver an incorrect, and potentially dangerous,
concentration, because the calibration depends on the specific agent's saturated
vapour pressure; an agent of higher saturated vapour pressure in a vaporiser
calibrated for a less volatile agent would cause an overdose, and vice versa.
To prevent this, agent-specific keyed filling systems are used:
each agent's bottle and the vaporiser's filler port have a uniquely shaped,
colour-coded keyed fitting, so that a vaporiser can only be filled from the bottle
of its correct agent, the keyed filler physically preventing connection of the
wrong agent.
The colour coding of agents and vaporisers further aids recognition.
The filling system is also designed to minimise spillage and the escape of vapour
into the theatre, reducing pollution, and to allow filling without overfilling,
a level indicator showing the liquid level,
since overfilling can allow liquid into the bypass and cause excessive output.
Vaporisers should be filled in a well-ventilated area, kept upright,
and not overfilled.
So vaporiser filling employs agent-specific keyed,
colour-coded fillers that physically prevent filling with the wrong agent —
guarding against the dangerous error of incorrect calibration — together with
measures to limit spillage and pollution and to prevent overfilling,
with the vaporiser kept upright and filled to the correct level.
What are drawover vaporisers, and where are they used?
Drawover vaporisers are a distinct class of vaporiser designed to operate without a
pressurised gas supply, the gas being drawn through them by the patient's own
respiratory effort or a self-inflating device,
and they have an important role in particular settings.
Unlike the plenum vaporiser, through which gas is driven under positive pressure
from the anaesthetic machine, the drawover vaporiser is designed to offer very low
resistance to flow, so that the patient can draw air through it by inspiration,
or a bellows or self-inflating bag can draw gas through it;
this makes it suitable for use where no compressed gas supply or anaesthetic
machine is available.
Examples include the older Oxford Miniature Vaporiser and the Epstein Macintosh
Oxford vaporiser.
Their key features are low internal resistance, robustness, simplicity,
and the ability to function with air as the carrier gas drawn from the atmosphere,
with oxygen added if available.
They are calibrated differently and may have less precise temperature compensation,
though some incorporate it, and they are typically used with a non-rebreathing or
simple breathing system incorporating one-way valves.
Their principal applications are in field anaesthesia,
military and remote settings, in resource-limited environments,
and in some transport and emergency situations,
where their independence from compressed gas and electrical supplies and their
simplicity and reliability are invaluable.
So drawover vaporisers are low-resistance vaporisers through which gas is drawn by
the patient's effort or a manual device rather than driven under pressure,
calibrated for use with air, and valued for their independence from compressed gas
supplies in field, military, remote and resource-limited anaesthesia.
Describe the modern injection or cassette vaporiser of electronic machines.
Modern electronically controlled anaesthetic machines may dispense with the
conventional mounted plenum vaporiser in favour of an integrated,
electronically controlled vaporiser,
of which the injection and cassette designs are examples,
and these represent an evolution in vapour delivery worth describing.
In one approach, exemplified by the cassette vaporiser,
the agent is held in an electronically controlled vaporising unit,
sometimes a removable agent-specific cassette identified by the machine,
and the machine measures the fresh gas flow and the agent concentration and
electronically controls the addition of vapour to achieve the set output,
using feedback from concentration measurement.
The agent may be vaporised in a controlled chamber and metered,
or injected as measured quantities of liquid or vapour into the fresh gas stream,
the electronic control system continuously adjusting to maintain the set
concentration regardless of flow and temperature,
using direct measurement of the delivered concentration as feedback.
The advantages are precise control across a wide range of flows including very low
flows, automatic compensation for changing conditions,
agent identification preventing the wrong agent,
integration with the machine's monitoring and control,
and the ability to support advanced low-flow and closed-circuit techniques.
The system depends on electrical power and electronic function,
with appropriate alarms and backups. These designs allow the machine to deliver a
precisely controlled concentration measured directly rather than relying solely on
mechanical calibration.
So the modern injection or cassette vaporiser holds the agent in an electronically
controlled, often agent-specific unit and meters vapour or injects liquid into the
fresh gas under feedback control from concentration measurement,
offering precise output across all flows, automatic compensation,
agent identification and integration with the machine,
while depending on electrical power.
What are the principal hazards of vaporisers, and how are they prevented?
Vaporisers, delivering potent agents in controlled concentrations,
carry several hazards that can harm the patient through overdose,
underdose or the wrong agent, and a systematic account of these and their
prevention is important.
The first is the wrong agent, filling a vaporiser with an agent other than its
calibration, causing a dangerous overdose or underdose;
this is prevented by agent-specific keyed fillers, colour coding, and,
in electronic machines, agent identification.
The second is overfilling or tilting,
allowing liquid agent into the bypass and causing a dangerously high output;
prevented by filling to the correct level, keeping the vaporiser upright,
and flushing if tipped.
The third is the simultaneous use of two vaporisers,
delivering a mixture of agents; prevented by the back bar interlock that permits
only one vaporiser on at a time.
The fourth is incorrect output from the effects already discussed — back pressure
and the pumping effect, extremes of flow,
or temperature outside the compensated range;
minimised by design and by operating within the calibrated range.
The fifth is leaving the vaporiser off when intended on, risking awareness,
or on when intended off, risking overdose,
detected by agent concentration monitoring.
The sixth is leaks from a poorly seated vaporiser, detected by the leak test.
The seventh is the pollution and the hazard of liquid agent spillage.
Agent concentration monitoring provides an essential independent check of the
actual delivered concentration.
So vaporiser hazards — the wrong agent, overfilling and tilting,
two vaporisers at once, incorrect output, being left on or off,
and leaks — are prevented by keyed fillers and agent identification,
correct filling and upright handling, the interlock,
operating within the calibrated range, the leak test, and, above all,
monitoring of the delivered agent concentration.
Finally, draw together the principles of the vaporiser as they bear on practice.
Drawing the station together, the vaporiser is the device that allows the
controlled delivery of volatile anaesthesia,
and understanding its principles is essential to its safe use and to recognising
the factors that affect the concentration delivered to the patient.
Its purpose is to add volatile agent to the fresh gas in an accurately controlled
concentration, solving the physical problem of diluting the agent's high saturated
vapour pressure to the low clinical concentration required,
stably despite the cooling of evaporation.
The standard variable-bypass plenum vaporiser achieves this by splitting the fresh
gas into a stream saturated in the vaporising chamber and a bypass stream,
recombining them at a ratio set by the concentration dial and calibrated for the
specific agent, with temperature compensation by high-thermal-capacity construction
and a bimetallic mechanism, and management of the effects of flow, carrier gas,
back pressure and the pumping effect.
Desflurane, with its near-atmospheric saturated vapour pressure and
near-room-temperature boiling point, requires a heated,
pressurised vaporiser that meters its vapour electronically.
Drawover vaporisers, of low resistance,
serve field and resource-limited anaesthesia,
and modern electronic injection and cassette vaporisers offer precise,
feedback-controlled delivery.
Throughout, agent-specific keyed fillers, the interlock, upright handling,
operation within the calibrated range, and, crucially,
monitoring of the delivered agent concentration guard against the hazards of the
wrong agent, overdose and underdose.
So the vaporiser unites the physics of saturated vapour pressure and temperature
with precise engineering and safeguards to deliver controlled volatile anaesthesia
— a device whose principles underpin its safe and accurate use.
What is the role of wicks and the vaporising chamber design in the plenum vaporiser?
The design of the vaporising chamber,
and in particular the use of wicks and baffles,
is important to the function of the plenum vaporiser,
because it ensures that the gas passing through the chamber becomes fully saturated
with agent, which is the assumption on which the calibration depends.
For the vaporiser to deliver its calibrated concentration,
the portion of gas directed into the vaporising chamber must emerge fully saturated
with vapour at the chamber temperature; if it were only partly saturated,
the output would be lower than intended.
To achieve full saturation efficiently,
the chamber is designed to maximise the contact between the gas and the liquid
agent and the surface area for evaporation.
Wicks — absorbent materials that draw the liquid agent up by capillary action and
present a large wetted surface to the gas — greatly increase the area of the
liquid-gas interface, so that the gas is fully saturated even at higher flows and
over a short path.
Baffles direct the gas over a tortuous path across the liquid and wick surfaces,
prolonging contact and promoting saturation.
This design allows the vaporiser to maintain full saturation,
and hence accurate output, across the range of flows for which it is calibrated.
The large wetted surface also means that evaporation, and so the cooling it causes,
is distributed, working with the high-thermal-capacity construction to stabilise
temperature.
So wicks and baffles in the vaporising chamber maximise the surface area and the
contact time between gas and liquid agent,
ensuring the chamber gas becomes fully saturated as the calibration requires,
maintaining accurate output across the flow range and distributing the cooling of
evaporation.
How does ambient pressure, as at altitude, affect vaporiser output?
The effect of ambient pressure on vaporiser output is a point of some subtlety,
because the volatile agent exerts its anaesthetic effect by its partial pressure
rather than its volumes-percent concentration,
and altitude affects these differently.
A conventional variable-bypass vaporiser is calibrated to deliver a set
volumes-percent concentration at normal atmospheric pressure.
The saturated vapour pressure of the agent depends only on temperature,
not on ambient pressure, so at a given temperature the partial pressure of agent in
the saturated chamber gas is fixed.
When the ambient pressure falls, as at altitude, the situation is as follows:
the vaporiser continues to deliver approximately the same partial pressure of
agent, because the saturated vapour pressure is unchanged,
but this partial pressure now represents a higher volumes-percent concentration of
the lower total pressure.
Thus the volumes-percent shown may differ from that at sea level, but, importantly,
the partial pressure of agent — which determines the depth of anaesthesia — remains
close to that intended, so the clinical effect is largely preserved despite the
altitude.
In effect the vaporiser is partly self-compensating in terms of partial pressure.
Conversely, in a hyperbaric environment the volumes-percent delivered for a given
partial pressure falls.
The desflurane vaporiser, which controls partial pressure differently,
requires specific consideration, and its output may need adjustment with altitude.
So because the agent acts by its partial pressure and the saturated vapour pressure
is independent of ambient pressure,
a conventional vaporiser delivers a roughly constant agent partial pressure
regardless of altitude, preserving the clinical effect even though the
volumes-percent concentration changes — a useful self-compensation in terms of
partial pressure.
Distinguish the pressurising effect from the pumping effect.
The pumping effect and the pressurising effect are two distinct phenomena by which
intermittent positive pressure from the breathing system or ventilator can alter
vaporiser output, and distinguishing them completes the account of back-pressure
effects.
The pumping effect, discussed earlier,
arises from the intermittent positive pressure transmitted back into the vaporiser
during controlled or manual ventilation:
the fluctuating pressure intermittently compresses the gas in the vaporising
chamber and then, as the pressure falls, allows it to expand and surge back,
carrying extra saturated vapour into the bypass and outlet,
so that the output is episodically increased above the set value;
it is most marked at low flows, low dial settings and low chamber liquid levels,
and is minimised by design features such as a long inlet tube, a small chamber,
baffles, or a check valve.
The pressurising effect, by contrast,
concerns the effect of a sustained increase in the pressure within the vaporiser.
When the pressure in the vaporiser is raised — for instance by downstream
resistance or pressurisation — the gas is compressed,
so that a given volume contains more molecules, but the partial pressure of agent,
set by the saturated vapour pressure, is unchanged;
the result is that the concentration of agent, as a fraction,
in the compressed gas is reduced, so the output concentration tends to fall
slightly under sustained raised pressure.
Thus the pumping effect, from fluctuating pressure, tends to increase output,
while the pressurising effect, from sustained raised pressure, tends to decrease it.
So the pumping effect is the episodic increase in output caused by fluctuating back
pressure surging vapour from the chamber, minimised by design,
whereas the pressurising effect is the slight decrease in output concentration
under sustained raised pressure as the compressed gas dilutes the fixed agent
partial pressure — distinct consequences of pressure on the vaporiser.
Describe the measured-flow vaporiser as a contrasting principle.
The measured-flow vaporiser represents an alternative principle to the
variable-bypass design, now largely of historical and conceptual interest but
instructive as a contrast, exemplified by the Copper Kettle and the Vernitrol.
In the variable-bypass vaporiser, the total fresh gas flow is split,
a portion passing through the vaporising chamber and the rest bypassing it,
the splitting ratio set by the concentration dial.
In the measured-flow vaporiser, by contrast,
a separately measured small flow of oxygen, set on its own dedicated flowmeter,
is directed through the vaporising chamber,
where it becomes fully saturated with agent,
and this saturated gas is then added to a separately measured main flow of fresh
gas; the final concentration is calculated from the known saturated vapour
pressure, the measured flow through the vaporiser, and the measured total flow.
The Copper Kettle was so named because it was constructed of copper,
a metal of high thermal conductivity,
to act as a heat reservoir and maintain temperature,
with a sintered disc to produce fine bubbles and ensure saturation.
The advantage was that, with knowledge of the saturated vapour pressure,
the output could be calculated for any agent,
making the device not agent-specific in the same way;
the disadvantage was the need for calculation and the risk of error,
and the device has been superseded by the calibrated agent-specific variable-bypass
vaporiser, which is simpler and safer to use.
So the measured-flow vaporiser, such as the Copper Kettle,
directs a separately measured flow through the vaporising chamber to full
saturation and adds it to a measured main flow,
the concentration being calculated from the saturated vapour pressure and the flows
— a contrasting principle requiring calculation,
now superseded by the calibrated variable-bypass vaporiser.
Distinguish a vaporiser placed inside the circle from one outside it.
A vaporiser may be positioned either outside the breathing circle,
in the fresh gas line, or inside the circle itself,
and the distinction between a vaporiser outside the circle and one inside the
circle has important implications for output and safety.
The standard arrangement is the vaporiser outside the circle:
the plenum vaporiser sits on the back bar in the fresh gas flow,
before the gas enters the circle, so that the fresh gas is charged with a
controlled concentration of agent before joining the circle;
this is the usual position for calibrated plenum vaporisers,
which require the driving pressure of the fresh gas flow and are calibrated for it.
A vaporiser inside the circle, by contrast, is placed within the circular gas path,
so that the recirculating gas passes through it repeatedly;
such a vaporiser must be of very low resistance,
since the patient or ventilator drives gas through it,
and is typically a simple drawover-type vaporiser without precise calibration.
The behaviour of a vaporiser inside the circle is complex and potentially
hazardous: because the gas passes through it repeatedly and recirculates,
the concentration can build up unpredictably,
especially at low fresh gas flows or high ventilation,
with a risk of a dangerously high concentration accumulating;
the output is not simply related to a dial setting.
For this reason, and because precise calibrated vaporisers cannot be used inside
the circle, the vaporiser-inside-the-circle arrangement requires great caution and
continuous agent monitoring, and is little used in modern practice.
So a vaporiser outside the circle, the standard arrangement,
charges the fresh gas with a calibrated concentration before it enters the circle,
whereas a low-resistance vaporiser inside the circle is passed through repeatedly
by recirculating gas, risking unpredictable concentration build-up,
requiring caution and agent monitoring, and is little used.
How is the output of a vaporiser affected by the composition of the carrier gas?
The composition of the carrier gas passing through the vaporiser has a modest
effect on its output, and although usually small,
this effect is worth understanding as a refinement of vaporiser behaviour.
The vaporiser is typically calibrated using oxygen, or air, as the carrier gas,
and its output is most accurate with that carrier.
When the carrier gas composition changes, two effects can alter the output slightly.
The first is a transient effect when nitrous oxide is introduced:
nitrous oxide is somewhat soluble in the liquid volatile agent,
so when a nitrous-oxide-containing mixture first passes through the vaporiser,
some nitrous oxide dissolves into the liquid agent,
transiently reducing the volume of gas emerging and so transiently lowering the
output, until the liquid becomes saturated with nitrous oxide and equilibrium is
restored, after which the output returns towards normal;
the reverse transient occurs when nitrous oxide is discontinued.
The second effect is that the different viscosity and density of the carrier gas
mixture slightly alter the splitting ratio between the chamber and the bypass,
because the flow characteristics through the channels depend on these properties,
causing a small change in output.
These effects are generally small and of limited clinical significance,
particularly with modern agent monitoring that measures the actual delivered
concentration.
So the carrier gas composition affects vaporiser output modestly:
introducing nitrous oxide causes a transient fall in output as it dissolves into
the liquid agent until equilibrium,
and the differing viscosity and density of the carrier slightly alter the splitting
ratio — small effects, monitored and corrected by agent concentration measurement.
What calibration, servicing and checking do vaporisers require?
Vaporisers, as precision devices delivering potent agents,
require periodic calibration and servicing and a pre-use check,
and an awareness of these is part of their safe use.
Each vaporiser is calibrated by the manufacturer for its specific agent,
so that the dial setting corresponds to the actual delivered concentration over the
range of flows and temperatures; this calibration can drift over time with wear,
and vaporisers therefore require periodic servicing and recalibration by the
manufacturer or an approved service, at recommended intervals, with records kept,
after which accuracy is verified.
Between services, the anaesthetist checks the vaporiser before use as part of the
machine check: confirming that it is correctly and securely seated on the back bar,
that the interlock functions so that only one vaporiser can be on at a time,
that it contains an adequate level of the correct agent and is not overfilled,
that the filling port is closed, and that there is no leak — a leak from a poorly
seated vaporiser being a cause of dilution and awareness,
detected by the leak test performed with the vaporiser both off and on.
The vaporiser must be kept upright to avoid liquid entering the bypass;
if it has been tipped, it should be flushed with a high flow before use.
Agent concentration monitoring during use provides a continuous check of the actual
output.
So vaporisers require periodic manufacturer calibration and servicing with records,
and a pre-use check confirming correct secure seating, a functioning interlock,
the correct agent at an adequate level, a closed filler and no leak,
with upright handling and flushing if tipped,
and continuous agent monitoring during use.
Comment on the environmental impact of volatile agents and its mitigation through
vaporiser practice.
The environmental impact of the volatile anaesthetic agents has become an important
consideration, and vaporiser and anaesthetic practice bear directly upon it,
so a brief account is warranted.
The volatile agents are potent greenhouse gases, which,
when exhaled and vented to the atmosphere through the scavenging system,
contribute to global warming; they differ considerably in their warming potential
and atmospheric lifetime, desflurane having the greatest global warming potential
and the longest atmospheric persistence, sevoflurane considerably less,
and the agents differing accordingly in their environmental footprint.
Nitrous oxide, often used as a carrier,
is additionally a greenhouse gas and depletes the ozone layer,
and is very long-lived. The mitigation of this impact through practice is
several-fold and bears on vaporiser use.
The most effective measure is the use of low fresh gas flows with a circle system,
which greatly reduces the quantity of agent used and vented for a given
anaesthetic, since the vaporiser output is largely recirculated rather than wasted;
high flows waste agent.
The choice of agent towards those of lower environmental impact,
the reduction or avoidance of nitrous oxide and especially desflurane where
suitable, and the use of total intravenous anaesthesia as an alternative,
all reduce the impact.
Technologies to capture and recycle or destroy waste anaesthetic agents from the
scavenging system are being developed.
So the volatile agents are greenhouse gases of differing potency,
desflurane and nitrous oxide being the most impactful,
and their environmental footprint is mitigated by low-flow anaesthesia minimising
waste, by choosing lower-impact agents and avoiding desflurane and nitrous oxide
where appropriate, by total intravenous techniques,
and by emerging capture technologies.
What is the role of agent concentration monitoring in relation to the vaporiser?
Agent concentration monitoring, the continuous measurement of the inspired and
end-tidal concentration of volatile agent,
is an essential adjunct to the vaporiser,
providing an independent confirmation of the concentration actually delivered to
the patient, and its role completes the safe use of the vaporiser.
While the vaporiser is designed and calibrated to deliver the concentration set on
its dial, a number of factors — the effects of flow, temperature, back pressure,
the pumping effect, low-flow technique, a leak, a malfunction,
or the wrong agent — can cause the actual delivered or inspired concentration to
differ from the dial setting.
Agent monitoring measures the actual concentration in the breathing system,
usually by infrared absorption, displaying the inspired and end-tidal agent
concentration and identifying the agent.
This provides several safeguards: it confirms that the intended concentration is
being delivered, detecting under-delivery that might risk awareness or
over-delivery that might risk overdose;
it reveals the changing relationship between dial setting and delivered
concentration during low-flow anaesthesia,
where the inspired concentration may lag the setting;
it can identify the wrong agent; and it allows the anaesthetic to be titrated to a
measured end-tidal concentration related to the minimum alveolar concentration,
a more reliable guide to anaesthetic depth than the dial setting alone.
Thus agent monitoring is the independent check that closes the loop between the
vaporiser setting and the patient.
So agent concentration monitoring continuously measures the actual inspired and
end-tidal volatile concentration, independently confirming the delivered
concentration, detecting under- or over-delivery and the wrong agent,
guiding low-flow technique, and allowing titration to an end-tidal target — the
essential independent check on vaporiser function.
Thank you. A comprehensive and accomplished account,
and a fitting close to this batch of physics stations. That concludes the station.
Before we close, here are the take-home messages.
First, The vaporiser adds volatile agent to the fresh gas in an accurately
controlled concentration, solving the problem of diluting the agent's high
saturated vapour pressure (temperature-dependent,
agent-specific) down to the few per cent required,
stably despite the cooling of evaporation.
Second, The variable-bypass plenum vaporiser splits fresh gas into a stream fully
saturated in the vaporising chamber and a bypass stream,
recombining them at a splitting ratio set by the concentration dial and calibrated
for the SPECIFIC agent (hence agent-specific);
temperature compensation uses high-thermal-capacity,
high-conductivity construction (a heat reservoir) plus a bimetallic mechanism
adjusting the splitting ratio.
Third, Output is also affected by flow rate (accurate over a calibrated range),
carrier gas, intermittent back pressure (the pumping effect, minimised by design),
and tilting (liquid into the bypass causes dangerous overdose - keep upright,
flush if tipped). 4.
Desflurane needs a special heated, pressurised vaporiser because its saturated
vapour pressure is near atmospheric and it boils at about 23 degrees Celsius - the
agent is held as vapour at a constant high temperature/pressure and metered
electronically into the fresh gas in proportion to flow.
Fourth, Vaporiser safety: agent-specific keyed colour-coded fillers prevent the
wrong agent, the back bar interlock allows only one vaporiser on at a time,
correct filling level and upright handling prevent overdose,
drawover vaporisers (low resistance) serve field anaesthesia,
and monitoring of the delivered agent concentration is the essential independent
check.
Thank you. That concludes the station.